QUARKUS-6258 | Quarkus AI - phase 1 features (#241)
quarkus-qe/quarkus-test-plans: QUARKUS-6258.md

If tests are run, they hang regularly, even on xlarge.
Given the above I do not recommend to (re)use this repository for product validation.

### Quarkiverse extension:
There are integration tests modules in the extension, but many of them use mocking or doesn't contain tests at all.
According to Mario, this is intentional, since they consider upstream lang4chain tests to be enough (but we do not!)
Ollama modules can be started on the laptop in dev mode. Jlama ones can be run as well.
The features we want to cover are being used in integration-tests modules for openai (Chats, Chat Memory, user/system messages, Function calling/Tools, Guardrails), rag,. There is no coverage for WebSockets (only in codestarts) and for ChatModel (only in mocktests).

### Impact on test suite
We should focus on updating and running upstream tests on productised binaries. Since we need to run tests on Openshift, we have to add tests in Quarkus TS, but try to use source code from https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-langchain4j/tree/main/integration-tests inside them via `@GitRepositoryQuarkusApplication`. If that fails, just create ordinary tests in the TS.

> We will also need to separate these modules, so we only run them during the prod testing.

Reviewer: One thing is Thomas asking for things, another thing is reality where we are. We will do what we can ...

If you want to commit to OpenShift and spend nights on it, it's your choice, but it's not sustainable.

There are also other requests, not just LangChain4J.

## Budget considerations:
We have (on average) one minor release per two months (with general scope testing) or two major releases per year (which include extended scope testing).
For every major release we run extended scope approximately 5-10 times and general scope the same amount of times. For every minor release we run general testing 1 or 2 times.
OpenAI is priced based on amount of tokens, where "token" is something like a root of a word[1].
The cheapest model[2] is gpt-4.1-nano with prices of $0.10 for 1M tokens of input($0.025 for cached input) and $0.40 for 1M token of output.
Workshop uses ~400 token of input. Output can be different, but let's assume 100 tokens per test as an upper limit.
That means, that one million runs of single workshop test will cost us 40 dollars for input and 40 for output, for a total cost of 80 dollars, and one dollar will allow us to do 10 000 runs.
If we put these tests into general testing (so, ~30 runs per year) and adding the debugging and development (100 runs altogether?), which means, that with current prices single dollar would be enough for approximately a century of testing.

> Important notes:

Author: > are usable for commercial use-cases

The link (https://platform.openai.com/docs/pricing) is in the footer, and there is no mention of any limits on the usage.

* https://quarkus.io/quarkus-workshop-langchain4j/

## Existing test coverage
### Workshop
https://quarkus.io/quarkus-workshop-langchain4j/step-11/#running-the-llm-inference-locally  and  https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-workshop-langchain4j/tree/main/step-11
- Are not run automatically
- The tests use jlama, which requires Java 21+ (this means, we are unable to verify them with java17)
- If tests are run, they hang regularly, even on xlarge.

Given the above I do not recommend to (re)use this repository for product validation.

### Quarkiverse extension:
There are integration tests modules in the extension, but many of them use mocking or don't contain tests at all.
According to Mario, this is intentional, since they consider upstream lang4chain tests to be enough (but we do not!)
Ollama modules can be started on the laptop in dev mode. Jlama ones can be run as well.
The features we want to cover are being used in integration-tests modules for OpenAI (Chats, Chat Memory, user/system messages, Function calling/Tools, Guardrails), RAG,. There is no coverage for WebSockets (only in codestarts) and for ChatModel (only in mocktests).

### Impact on test suite

> We should focus on updating and running upstream tests (from the Quarkiverse extensions) on productised binaries. Since we need to run tests on Openshift, we have to add tests in Quarkus TS, but try to use source code from https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-langchain4j/tree/main/integration-tests inside them via `@GitRepositoryQuarkusApplication`. If that fails, just create ordinary tests in the TS.
> We will also need to separate these modules, so we only run them during the prod testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will focus on updating and running upstream tests from the Quarkiverse extensions against productised binaries.

Primary focus will be on RHEL-based testing to ensure functionality of proposed features against productized bits. For the OpenShift side, we will explore the possibility of using the `@GitRepositoryQuarkusApplication` approach.

As we aim for tech preview level for 3.27, we won't be focusing on full platform matrix coverage. We will be gaining experience to expand the coverage and platforms in the upcoming releases.
```
